Something interesting is starting to
happen in Ukraine right now. For the
first time in years since the early days
of the Russian invasion, it now appears
that the Ukrainians are regaining the
momentum again. And that the Russian war
machine along with the economy that
supports it are both beginning to crack
under the enormous strains of a
full-scale war that is now well into its
fifth year. To put the sluggish pace of
Russia's recent military advances into
perspective, consider that in the first
phase of the war in 2014, the Russians
seized control over about 7% of
Ukraine's territory. Then, in the
opening weeks of the full-scale invasion
in early 2022, the Russians managed to
expand that to an occupation of nearly
27% of Ukraine's territory at the peak
before successful Ukrainian
counteroffensives managed to reduce that
down to about 18% of Ukraine's territory
by November of 2022. Over the past three
and a half years of brutal, grinding,
attritional warfare since that time, the
Russians have only managed to seize
control over another 1.5% of Ukraine's
territory and have paid an almost
incalculable price in blood to do so.
More than 1 million Russian soldiers
have been killed or wounded just in
order to conquer this extra 1.5% of
Ukraine's land during these past 3 and
1/2 years. To put this into perspective
for my fellow Americans, the Russians
have spent three and a half years and
have paid more than 1 million casualties
just in order to conquer an area of land
that is smaller than Los Angeles County
in Southern California. When adding the
casualties from the early days of the
invasion before November of 2022, total
Russian casualties, both killed and
wounded in the war, have by now likely
climbed higher than 1.2 2 million with
British and Swedish intelligence both
now estimating that around 500,000 of
those Russian casualties are deaths. In
other words, around 3% of Russia's
entire pre-war male population of
fighting age has been either killed or
wounded by this war in Ukraine. An
utterly devastating statistic for any
society that seems like it should belong
in the 20th century rather than in the
21st. And the pace of Russia's
casualties have only been increasing.
Since the start of 2026, at least
according to Ukrainian sources, Russia
has been averaging roughly 35,000
casualties on the front lines in Ukraine
every single month, which has been
starting to outpace Russia's ability to
find new recruits to replace them. This
is a massive gamecher in the war if it's
true. Because throughout 2024 and most
of 2025, Russia was still able to
recruit more men for the war than it was
losing. Russia was able to do this by
offering up huge financial incentives
for enlisting, which has been
particularly attractive in Russia's less
developed poor rural regions. Soldiers
enlisting could earn up to seven or
eight times the median annual Russian
wage during just one year of service on
the front. On top of generous debt
forgiveness, free college tuition, and
even free land handouts. Throughout
2025, when Russia was averaging closer
to 23,000 casualties a month, these
incentives were strong enough to always
find more than enough replacements. But
now in 2026, with a much higher casualty
ratio of 35,000 a month, they haven't
been enough. And for the first time in
this war, Russia is failing to replace
all of their losses in manpower.
Ukraine's manpower losses have been
numerically smaller, but even more
catastrophic as a demographic
percentage. The Center for Strategic and
International Studies believes that
Ukrainian casualties, both killed and
wounded throughout the war, now number
somewhere around 600,000.
This is only about half of the total
casualties suffered by the Russians. But
it also represents nearly 7% of
Ukraine's entire pre-war fighting age
male population that have been killed or
wounded, compared to Russia's 3%.
This in a nutshell has been the brutal
logic of Russia's attritional warfare
strategy that they adopted against
Ukraine in November of 2022. Russia's
larger manpower and resources meant that
Russia could pay much higher casualties
in a numerical sense. While Ukraine was
slowly ground down by much higher
demographic damage, Russia's bet was
that eventually the higher demographic
damage that was being inflicted upon
Ukraine through this style of
attritional warfare would cause them to
break first and result in a rapid
collapse of their front lines all at
once. Which is why Russia has felt
comfortable with their ability to afford
paying numerically higher casualty rates
until then. But the problem for the
Kremlin is that the longer this war
continues going on and the longer that
Ukraine stubbornly holds out, the more
damage it's still causing to Russia,
too. For an increasingly impatient
population that has been repeatedly
promised a quick and decisive victory.
In January of 2026, what was initially
envisioned as being simply a 3-day
special military operation passed an
ominous milestone, the 1,418
day mark, exceeding the length of the
Soviet Union's entire war against Nazi
Germany. And if Russia is to achieve
even its most minimum of objectives
during this war, it is likely to last
for many years longer. Still, if Russia
is able to maintain the same pace of
advance it achieved in 2024 and 2025,
they will still not be capable of
completing the conquest of the rest of
the eastern Donbass region for another 2
or 3 years, pushing the war well into
2028 or even 2029.
Full control over the entire Donbass
region is the top priority war objective
of the Kremlins that they have never
been willing to compromise on. and Putin
has ordered the Russian military to
finish it by the end of this year in
2026.
In order to do so, the Russian military
will have to begin advancing much more
rapidly than they were able to do in
2024 and 2025. But it is significantly
more heavily defended and reinforced
urban Ukrainian defenses.
And worse for the Kremlin, since April
of this year, the Russians have actually
started losing ground in the war for the
first time in years. In April, the
Russians suffered a net loss of 116
square km of territory in Ukraine,
marking the first monthly net
territorial loss that the Kremlin's
forces have suffered in Ukraine since
the major Ukrainian counteroffens
offensive 3 years previously in 2023.
The Russians have lost even further
ground in May, and the comparisons with
their military performance in 2025 are
striking. According to the Institute for
the Study of War, Russian forces seized
control over roughly 516 km of territory
in Ukraine between December 2024 and May
2025. While over the same period this
year, they managed to lose 280 km.
Russia's advances nearly everywhere
along the front line of ground to a
virtual halt over these past couple of
months. And so the idea that Russia
could take over the entire Dawnbass in
this environment by 2028, let alone by
the end of 2026 as ordered by Putin,
seems very far-fetched.
So why is this happening now? Why is
Russia's army seemingly running out of
steam and beginning to lose ground? And
how much weaker is Russia than they
actually seem to appear? First, Russia's
economy is probably not doing as well as
official Russian government data would
suggest. The Russian government claims
that the country's GDP expanded by about
13% in the years between 2020 and 2024
despite the war. However, in a recent
op-ed that was published in the New York
Times by the foreign minister of Sweden,
Maria Malder Stenergard, she wrote that
a Swedish government analysis of the
change in Russia's nighttime luminosity
suggested that the Russian economy
actually contracted by 8% during that
time span instead. She also pointed out
that while Russia's official inflation
figure in 2024 was only 10%, the Russian
central bank still hiked their interest
rates to 21% the same year as well,
suggesting that the inflation problem in
Russia is significantly worse than the
official figures would imply. Currently,
in mid 2026, Russia claims that its
inflation figure is only 5.2%.
But Sweden's military intelligence chief
has estimated that in reality it's
closer to 15%. three times higher than
the officially reported figure. If
that's accurate, then Russia's current
capacity for military spending is much
weaker than it actually appears. And
these inflationary demons in Russia
aren't likely to go away anytime soon.
With a sharp demographic downturn and a
high demand for manpower in both the
military and the defense industrial
base, these inflationary pressures on
Russia will inevitably continue
persisting so long as the war goes on
and will be negatively impacting the
Russian civilian population that has to
deal with it. As the war goes on, with
no promised victory in sight, the
casualties piling up, the inflation
persisting, and state repression
intensifying through increased internet
and media censorship, the approval
rating of Putin's government is
beginning to tumble. Even according to
official Russian stateowned data, which
indicates that Putin's current approval
rating in Russia has fallen down to
65.6%.
A significant decrease from the 77.8%
that he enjoyed immediately before the
start of the invasion. and well below
the 80% plus ratings that he was getting
for years before then. And of course,
many new Ukrainian strategies that
they've adopted since mid2025 have also
been contributing to these negative
outcomes for Russia, too, because
they're working exceptionally well. Over
a year ago, in March of 2025, Zalinsky
released a video in which he discussed a
new strategy of bringing the war back to
Russia. In it, he said, quote, "The war
was brought from Russia, and it is to
Russia that the war must be pushed back.
They must be the ones forced into peace.
They are the ones who must be pressured
to ensure security." End quote. Since
that time, Ukraine has largely halted
their older strategy of conducting
costly ground counter offensives to
reclaim territory that was always very
casualty inensive and have adopted a
more long range asymmetric strategy that
is designed to harm the Russian economy
and civilian morale on the home front
instead. After Russia conquered the city
of Abdiva on the outskirts of Donetsk in
early 2024, Ukraine was forced onto the
defensive and faced crippling shortages
of artillery shells and delays in US
military aid that it had been expecting.
Forced to innovate, Ukraine increasingly
turned to small FPV drones as a cheap
and effective substitute for their lack
of conventional artillery. FPV drone
production rapidly increased to the
point where now more than 150 local
Ukrainian manufacturers are building
millions of new FPV drones a year and
hundreds of thousands of them are now
being fielded along the front line at
any given time. Russia has responded
with similar levels of FPV drone
production and now the entire front line
is completely saturated with these
modern weapons of war. for 745 miles
along the entire length of the front
lines stretching between 15 and 30 m
deep. Now, the density of these short
range FPV drones have established a kill
zone that is nearly impossible for
either sign to penetrate. Just about
every square inch of this kill zone is
under constant drone surveillance, full
of buzzing kill drones armed with
explosives.
This environment has made the mass
armored breakthroughs that define 20th
century warfare virtually impossible
today and has been dramatically
contributing to the rise in battlefield
casualties and deaths for both sides.
Though it is currently affecting the
Russians more since they're the ones who
are still largely attempting to advance
through it. The constant presence of
explosive drones within the kill zone
makes medical evacuations for wounded
soldiers with helicopters or ambulances
almost impossible. Which means that
wounded soldiers are being forced to go
untreated for hours or even days. As a
result, the ratio of wounded to killed
soldiers has gone from 10 to one near
the start of the war down to three or
4:1 instead a day. Today, drones are
believed to account for around 70% of
all Russian and Ukrainian casualties on
the battlefield, and both sides are
finding it difficult to break through
the other's drone wall. And combined
with these swarms of short-range FPV
drones along the front line that
typically have ranges of less than 100
km, the Ukrainians are combining
increased usage of more advanced
intermediate range drones to strike
Russian logistics and longrange drones
to strike against the Russian economy.
The intermediate range drones have
ranges of up to 300 km. And Ukraine's
production of these types of drones is
five times greater in 2026 than it was
in 2025, according to Zalinski. And the
Ukrainians have been making good use of
them in 2026 by striking against Russian
logistics and support infrastructure far
behind the front lines like roads,
ammunition depots, staging areas,
anti-air systems, radars, and drone
warehouses among other targets.
This year, the M14 highway, which
extends from the Russian city of
Rustavon through occupied Maria Poland
on into Crimea, has come under
particularly heavy attack by these
Ukrainian intermediate range drones.
Open source analysts on X have mapped
out more than 125 intermediate range
drone strikes along this highway over
just the past couple of months alone,
which have destroyed dozens and dozens
of Russian trucks transporting
ammunition, fuel, spare parts, and
reinforcements to the front line. All of
this is hindering Russia's ability to
adequately resupply their own front
lines. While some Russian military
bloggers like Vladimir Romanov have even
claimed that they are contributing to
fuel shortages in Crimean cities like
Sevastapole. Building anti- drone
countermeasures along highways like this
like drone nets takes precious time to
do. While Russian logistics can't simply
just stop using the highways in the
meantime. On the 27th of May, Ukraine's
412th Nemesis Brigade reported that
these intermediate strikes have already
forced Russia into restricting heavy
military traffic along sections of the
R280 corridor that links the occupying
cities of Maria and Malita with Crimea,
which is undermining Russia's ability to
resupply its entire southern front. And
then on top of these intermediate and
short-range drone strikes that are
impairing Russian logistics and combat
operations, the Ukrainians are
increasingly using long range drone and
missile strikes to impair the Russian
economy that funds the war effort as
well. With ranges punching as deep as
1,750
km into Russia proper, these long range
Ukrainian strikes are now penetrating 2
and 1/2 times as far as they were when
the war started 4 years ago.
There are many places that Ukraine has
been targeting with these long range
strikes, but they've particularly been
striking Russia's oil and gas
infrastructure and maritime ports in a
calculated effort to eat into as much of
Russia's oil and gas revenue streams as
possible. After the US and Israel
launched a war against Iran in 2026 and
Iran began blocking the straight of
Hormuz, the global price of oil
skyrocketed, which led to widespread
expectations that Russia, who was among
the world's largest producers and
exporters of oil, would reap a huge
windfall that would help fund its
military. However, just across April and
May of this year, the Ukrainians managed
to strike at least 20 Russian oil
refineries and export terminals with
these kind of long range strikes. Most
dramatic of all was in April when
long-range Ukrainian drones managed to
strike the Talbs oil refinery and export
terminal on Russia's Black Sea coast.
The attack caused a massive oil spill
that contaminated at least 50 kilometers
of the Russian coast. Thick black smoke
from the fire stretched all the way down
south to the resort town of Sochi that
was even visible to airline passengers
while rains saturated with oil and soot
fell around the city and contaminated
its soil. Ukraine has been able to
conduct strikes virtually all across
western Russia this year from St.
Petersburg to Moscow to the Caucasus and
nearly as far east as the Eurals. And as
a result of all of this, Bloomberg has
reported that Russia's seabour oil
exports fell by roughly 300,000 barrels
per day in March. While the average
output at all Russian oil refineries
fell to 4.69 69 million barrels per day
total in April, which is ominously the
lowest amount of oil production that
Russia has managed since December of
2009.
Russia's much anticipated windfall from
the spike in oil prices that was caused
by the Iran war so far has also been
heavily countered by these concentrated
long range Ukrainian attacks, which by
proxy has negatively affected Russia's
ability to continue paying for the war.
Ukraine has dubbed these kinds of
attacks against Russian oil and gas
infrastructure as a sort of kinetic
sanctions. While Russian oil and gas
companies all across the country have
been forced into investing in expensive
counter drone defenses like signal
jammers, giant metal nets, or even
anti-aircraft systems. Then an
additional factor that's been
complicating Russian war efforts has
been SpaceX's decision in February of
this year to block off the Russians
access to their Starlink satellite
network within the occupied areas of
Ukraine. The Russian military had
reportedly smuggled in loads of
unauthorized Starlink internet terminals
in the occupied territories of Ukraine
that they were using to facilitate their
battlefield communications and drone
operations. The Ukrainian government
worked together with SpaceX to get all
of these unauthorized Starling terminals
deactivated, which has only added on
even further pressure on the Russians,
frustrating their battlefield
communications and forcing Russian drone
operators to switch back to using more
visible antennas again. The Ukrainian
counter drone operators can more easily
spawn and destroy. And then there's the
Russian government's own throttling of
the Telegram messenger app as well. For
those of you who might not know,
Telegram is the most popular messenger
app of choice across most of the former
Soviet block countries like Russia,
Ukraine, and Belleras. However, Russia
began partially throttling and blocking
Telegram in May of 2025. And since April
of 2026, they've been largely blocking
it completely. The Russian government
has claimed that the block of telegram
is necessary to prevent Ukrainian drones
from accessing local mobile networks.
But it has also conveniently for them
shut down protest groups ability to
effectively organize. And it is forcing
Russian civilians to adopt state
controlled alternatives where their
communications can be more effectively
monitored instead. Since Russian
soldiers and officers have also been
heavily relying upon Telegram for their
own battlefield communications and
logistics coordination, the block has
also frustrated them even further. on
top of the Starling ban and the
Ukrainian drone strikes. And then in
April, Hungary's longtime authoritarian
prime minister Victor Orban lost his
re-election bid in a landslide defeat to
his rival Peter Majar. This was critical
for Ukraine because for months, Orban's
government was vetoing and blocking a 90
billion euro loan package to Ukraine
that the rest of the EU was attempting
to pass. With Orban's decisive defeat in
the election, his incoming replacement,
Peter Majar, has promised that he will
immediately remove Hungary's veto on the
loan package, which means that Ukraine
will be receiving a 90 billion euro loan
injection from the EU to continue
staying in the fight for longer. The
loan is also interest free for Ukraine,
while Brussels believes that the entire
principal amount will eventually be
fully repaid back to them through
reparation payments from Russia.
Meanwhile, Ukraine is also solidifying
their defense relationships with the
Western world as well, which is in a
sense ensuring continued Western support
for their cause, even in the absence of
formal defense agreements. Germany and
Ukraine have signed a deal to jointly
produce thousands of AI enabled
intermediate range drones out of a
factory in Bavaria. The UK is jointly
producing combat drones with Ukraine and
Sulk. And Denmark is jointly producing
rocket fuel with Ukraine and Jutland.
Most notably of all, after Iranian
drones embarrassed American anti-air
defenses in the Persian Gulf when they
destroyed more than $1.3 billion dollars
in US military hardware for just the
price of a few Toyota Corollas. The US
decided to bring in 201 Ukrainian anti-
drone specialists to Saudi Arabia to
help with shooting them down. The more
that Ukraine innovates in the war
against Russia, the more experience and
technology they'll have to share with
the rest of the world for the wars of
tomorrow. And that alone is making it
far less likely that Ukraine's allies
will ever abandon them. Altogether,
Ukraine's strategies are starting to
work in 2026. The tide of battle is
tangibly beginning to shift, and Russia
is running out of good options for
accomplishing even their most minimum of
objectives in the war, like finalizing
the occupation of the Donbass region by
the end of this year. Because of all of
these setbacks the Ukrainians have
managed to inflict on the Russians this
year, Putin is likely going to be left
with only two highly unpalatable
choices. He could settle for an attempt
at a ceasefire roughly along the current
front lines and abandon the stated
objective of securing the entire dawn
bass. But Ukraine might not be willing
to entertain that if they're the ones
continuing to gain more momentum. While
hardline Russians who expect a victory
in the war would likely be outraged at
the sense of betrayal and half measures.
On the other hand, Putin could also
still choose to escalate the war further
by ordering up another general
mobilization round that could forcibly
deploy another 200,000 more Russian
soldiers to the front lines. But doing
that would be extremely politically
risky for the Kremlin, especially as
Putin's own polling numbers have been
significantly declining this year. The
last and so far only time that Putin has
ordered a general mobilization during
this war was back in September of 2022
for 300,000 men in the early days of the
invasion and it led to more than a
million Russian men of fighting age
fleeing the country to avoid service and
was hugely unpopular.
With the Russian economy showing huge
signs of stress that the government is
not publicly acknowledging with the war
already in its fifth year that has
already been Russia's bloodiest conflict
since the Second World War with internet
censorship and Ukrainian drone strikes
across the country both increasing with
the army stalled out on the front lines
with a prior history of military
mutinies like the great Fogna group
rebellion over the summer of 2023 and
with Hudin's own popularity in Russia
already at a historic low point. Would
Putin actually risk it all on another
mobilization order to try and finish the
occupation of the Dawn Bass? Or would he
attempt to settle for some kind of a
ceasefire? Time will tell, but for now,
2026 is increasingly looking like it'll
be Ukraine's year. Ultimately though,
figuring out and solving the
geopolitical crisis in Ukraine will
likely be as difficult going forward as
it's already been for more than a decade
since Russian troops first marched
across the border and seized Crimea in
2014. But something that is very much
figured out on the other hand is what
you should watch next or at least put on
your list and that's the China that she
grew up in. A grand theory of Xihinping,
which is a Nebula exclusive, which means
that it exists only on the streaming
service that myself and a whole bunch of
other creators put together called
Nebula. Created by my friend Poly
Matter, this documentary explores the
dramatic rise to power of Xihinping.
From sleeping on the floor of a cave to
leading one of the two global
superpowers of the 21st century, it's an
incredible story that's well worth your
time and will help you understand even
more about the modern world we live in.
Then there are also my own projects on
Nebula like Mad Keys, a show that
explores the darker histories of some of
modern history's most well-known
dictators, including other recent
historical figures who have clashed with
the Western world like Libya's Muamar
Gaddafi and Iraq's U Hussein. along with
episodes covering the reigns of North
Korea's Kiml Sunsung and Kim Jong-il
that explore how they were actually able
to avoid a US intervention. And then
there's also my other Nebula series
called Modern Conflicts, which explores
modern wars, battles, and conflicts in a
level of depth and detail that would
never work out on YouTube without
triggering this site's demonetization
and age restriction policies with
episodes you can watch covering the
Israel Palestinian conflict, Hamas's
attack on Israel on October 7th, the
overthrow of the Assad regime in Syria,
and Israel's invasion of the Gaza Strip
that explain the crucial backstory
information you need to understand
what's currently happening in the Middle
beast right now. These are my own
projects, but there's also just so much
good stuff on Nebula from other creators
right now that you can watch, too.
There's Day Pass, hosted by Jason from
Not Just Bikes, that explores the world
through the lens of public
transportation down on the ground. If
you ever wondered what ever happened to
Lindsay Ellis, she's been making her
usual documentaries on Nebula for years
now instead of YouTube. There's Patrick
Will's latest short film, The Dinner
Plan, featuring big names like Griffin
Newman and Zack Cherry. There's Abolish
Everything, our new comedy debate
premise recorded live in New York. Scav,
a donkey series produced by the Wendover
Productions and Jetlag folks tracing the
incredible drama and unfoldings of the
world's largest annual scavenger hunt,
hosted at the University of Chicago and
oldest and newest places by Joe Scott. A
fulllength documentary exploring the
oldest and newest rocks on the planet
and what it takes to actually visit
them. I could honestly keep going and
going, but just believe me when I say
that with every month that goes by, the
Nebula catalog keeps getting deeper,
making becoming a subscriber even
better. But we also need you to help
keep this whole cycle going. We have a
great deal running right now that when
you use my link at
nebula.tv/realifelorore TV/realifelorore
or by scanning the QR code here on your
screen or by clicking the button. You'll
get a whole 50% off of an annual Nebula
subscription, which will bring the cost
for you down to just $30 for the entire
year or $ 250 a month, a small fraction
of the price of other streaming
services. As other streamers keep
raising their prices, this is an awesome
deal. And if you want to sign up for a
lifetime subscription to Nebula, never
deal with a monthly subscription ever
again, you can also get one for 40% off
right now for $300 as well. So give us a
shot and thank you so much for
supporting not only my own channel, but
all of the other creators who are
building Nebula with their own awesome
content as well. And as always, thank
you so much for watching.